# August 14, 2024 (Part 2)

## Recap

The last blog entry was done after midnight and this blog entry is done before midnight, hence the "Part 2".

Now that I'm fresh at the late hours of 10:50 PM, it's time to get down to business.

The plan is to bring back up the ELF format and then re-add all the ELF parsing logic.

Go me...

## Some notes

This is going by a little faster since I do remember quite a bit from the last time I did this. For example:

1. The fields indicating endianess and architecture aren't just there to tell which machine the ELF file is compatible with.
    They determine the format of the rest of the integer values. This makes loading a compatible ELF very easy but if you need to
    simply load the integer into a register. I believe both x86 and ARM are of the same endianess.
2. My kernel only has all program headers or all section headers and this made sense.

Can I also say how awesome VS Code can be with workspaces. My workspace automatically comes with a hex viewer.


Something else that's interesting about ELF files. They have a section containing all the null terminated strings that need to be
referenced. They're just one big blob one after the other. When a string is referenced elsewhere in the ELF file, it's an offset into this section.

## Outro for today

That's it for tonight. 2 hours of work and I've parsed the ELF header... again.

Tomorrow night we start walking the sections. Re-reading the ELF file manually I can confirm it has all sections and no program headers.